Love is a profoundly
social emotion.
At all stages of
human development,
love has
in different forms
been an integral
part of culture.
Love is not
in the least
a private matter
concerning only the
two loving persons.
Love possesses a
uniting element
which is valuable
to the collective.
There's an almost
natural tendency for humans
to assume that
ideas are eternal
and that
words have stable,
unchanging referents.
People have used
the word 'love" for
thousands of years,
and so we
assume naturally that
there's one meaning
underneath all these
uses of love.
Yet it's clear
that the concept of
love does change.
In the 16th century,
Machiavelli asked whether
it was better
to be
feared or loved.
In the 2010s, several
influential figures were saying
it was better to
be respected than loved.
Presently, I see
people asking whether
it is better
to be
loved or understood.
Because someone
can love you,
but not understand
you at all.
While these questions
are interesting in themselves,
I think it's
more fundamental and
thus more interesting
to observe that
what people deem worthy
of comparison
to love changes.
Now, it's not
that love itself changes.
There is no
love in the abstract.
Love, like any
social phenomenon,
is interpreted,
and so we
might wonder what interpretation
currently makes sense.
What is so valuable
such that it can
rival the significance
of being loved?
That is a socio -historical question.
Why do many view
understanding as belonging to
the core of love
instead of other
adjacent qualities like tolerance,
patience, or justice?
Addressing these
questions give insight
into current
conceptions of love
and our broader
social structure.
During the
Russian Civil War,
Alexandra Kollontai
observed the lack
of emotional depth
and commitment
the revolutionaries gave
their romantic relationships.
Not because the
culture was particularly immature
or because everyone had
an avoidant attachment style.
Rather, the material
conditions of revolution made
it so that
people had no
time or energy
for the deep
feelings that typically
accompany love.
Lying in bed
for nights on end,
unable to sleep
as you yearn
for your lover.
That's a loss of
energy and focus
that revolution couldn't afford.
"In face of the
revolutionary threat,
tender-winged Eros
fled from the
surface of life.
The fighting class
could not have
fallen under the
power of winged Eros
at a time when
the clarion call
of revolution was sounding."
However, once the
revolution succeeded
and the Soviet Republic
was established,
Soviet situationships fell
out of favor.
People wanted
something deeper,
something longer lasting,
because the material
conditions allowed for that.
The material conditions
changed and so
too did people's
relationship with love.
If we look
at current material conditions,
it makes sense
why love and understanding
are discussed together.
I want to
be clear that,
of course, I
don't think our historical
epoch is unique in
wanting to be understood.
Everybody encounters a
special and intimate psychological
experience associated with
what we call love.
But the interpretation
of that experience
changes depending on
the social context.
Being respected may
have felt like
the right way
to explain a
special intimate feeling
in the 1700s
when respect
was more rare.
But in our modern
pluralist society,
respect is kind
of a baseline expectation
to be able to
move through the world.
So we have to
consider the structure of
current society to see
why being understood is
now the fitting
term to interpret love.
What makes understanding
so special for personal
relationships in a way
that other virtues aren't?
For one, the
tremendous accessibility of
products and services
and the economic logic
that mediates our relationships
has devalued material
instantiations of love.
You don't need
someone to burn
CDs for you
when you've got
a cheap streaming service
that can play
any song you
want at the touch
of a button.
Buying movie tickets
for your partner loses
value when you can
watch anything at home.
I'm not saying these
acts aren't loving anymore.
I would feel
happy if someone
made me mixtapes.
But the social
value of these
acts has diminished.
There are always
convenient alternatives and
we don't want
love to be
based in convenience.
We might still
want loved ones
to do these material
acts for us,
but there is
no need to
rely on them.
In fact, many
think it is
a virtue to be
materially self-sufficient.
Techno-capitalism nurtures
isolated individuals,
making others more obsolete.
Under this system, it
can feel like the
only thing safe from
obsolescence is our immaterial
recognition of each other.
How I understand
you literally cannot
be bought or possessed
or reproduced.
What matters then
is not what
our lover does,
but whether what
they do is
responsive to US.
This means the
standard for what counts
as being understood
has also increased.
The digital age
makes it materially possible
to know more about
others than ever before.
You can know
someone you've never
met just by
stalking their various
social media accounts,
their likes and following.
In the past,
burning a perfect
CD for your
partner would require
you to be
attentive and present
when you're together,
so that you
remember comments they
make about music,
or make complex
inferences about their music
taste based off
of their general disposition.
Now, if you
want to burn
someone a CD,
you don't have
to be that attentive
when you're together.
Even if you're
on your phone
half the time,
you can always
look at their Spotify
listening history later,
or check out their
music highlights on Instagram.
An act that once
required emotional attunement can
now be accomplished
by an act
of data collection.
We also voluntarily
hand out personal
information for
others to consume,
posting our
internal thoughts,
photos of places we
regularly frequent,
clicking accept all
to cookies which
makes data brokers
jump with glee.
Target can literally
know you're
pregnant before your
own family does.
ChatGPT can give
relationship advice
tailored to your
specific life details.
It doesn't mean
much to know things
about people anymore.
Knowing a lot of
facts about someone might
have constituted understanding
in the past,
but this is no
longer sufficient.
Otherwise, AI chatbots
would seem to
understand us.
The standard for
love must rise
above what's ordinary.
The standard for
love must be special.
Thus, to be
loved is to
be understood deeply,
almost intuitively,
as if to
preserve a still
uniquely human trait.
I saw this TikTok
where this creator
tied Jean-Paul Sartre's
concept of the Look to the intimacy
of being understood.
People say, I love
you, when what
they really mean is,
I love the
idea of you
that I've already constructed
in my head.
That version is rarely
accurate and is
often shaped by desire,
timing, and
personal narrative,
or by what the
other person represents more
than what they are.
She says when
someone perceives you accurately,
it's not generous,
it's not romantic,
but it's precise.
To be caught in
someone's look is
to be seen as
who you really are.
But I wonder
if there actually has
to be a
distinction between
accuracy and romance,
between precision
and generosity.
I think of the
philosopher Iris Murdoch
and how for her,
what is true
IS what is
good and beautiful.
Again, accuracy of knowledge
is not special anymore.
That can be
replicated by AI
and by the business
of data collection.
Thus,
true understanding is not
directed towards a single,
accurate set of facts.
Rather, understanding
approaches
people with a
just and loving vision.
I don't care
how normal you
think you are,
we all have
our quirks or flaws
that can rub
people the wrong way.
Sometimes, I'm not
the most honest person.
But it stems from
a very complicated history
of lying to maintain
a sense of self,
insecurity about presenting
who I really am,
etc, etc. When
I am dishonest,
a stranger may
just perceive the
objective fact of my
lie and judge me.
But someone who loves
me will want
to interpret me charitably.
Generosity makes the
lover's understanding more accurate.
There are lots
of people on
the internet who want
to understand you,
but not
for loving reasons.
Say the thousands
of data brokers
who are collecting,
aggregating, and trading
your personal data
without you knowing.
Which then fuels
landlords who illegally
evict people or
harassment cases.
Today, sponsor Incogni
can help you
be less known
without your consent.
The first time I
signed up with Incogni
was when I
got scammed and
lost $10,000.
So,
it was pretty
important for me to
start taking my
data off the market.
If you think only
boomers fall for scams,
think again.
Now maybe you think,
Eh, but I'm
fine. Olivia just
is an exception.
She lacks basic awareness.
And you're probably right.
Did I mention
the time I
got my PayPal hacked
by giving a
Depop seller my email
and verification code
to log into PayPal?
Okay, but aside
from my personal stupidity,
a lot of your
data is stolen
even when you're careful.
Data brokers usually
have your full
name, home address,
gender, education, relatives,
and even shopping habits.
Just this past
October, actually,
Gmail usernames and
passwords were included
in a data
breach impacting more than
183 million accounts online,
including mine.
Even if your Gmail
password hasn't been
stolen directly from Google,
many people reuse
credentials across platforms.
That means a
breach in one
place can instantly
compromise your entire
digital life, email,
social media,
and banking access included.
Incogni literally communicates to
data brokers on your
behalf to get
your data removed
from the internet.
What happens if
you find your information
exposed on a site
not covered by Incogni?
Don't panic because
in the Unlimited and
Family Unlimited plan,
custom removals allows
you to submit links
and Incogni's team of
privacy experts will
review each link for
eligibility before requesting the
removal of your
data on your behalf.
Go to incogni
.com and use
the code OLLISUNVIA for
60% off.
Incogni helps wipe
yourself from the internet.
They can't harm
you if they
can't find you.
You can click
the link down below
to get 60
% off and
protect your personal information.
I
tell you everything,
every damn
embarrassing thing.
You don't trust me.
Constantly talking isn't
necessarily communicating.
I decided to
make this video
because I was torn
between two thoughts.
On the one hand,
it felt intuitive
that love required understanding.
I mean, how
could you claim to
love someone if
you can't remember
little details about them?
Like whether they prefer
apples peeled or not.
Like many, I
saw this viral
interview about how
I remember you
is more intimate than
I love you.
A year later,
we rematched on Hinge.
He was like, let
me make you dinner.
And I was like,
just reminding you,
like, I'm celiac. And
he's like, oh,
don't worry, I
already got your
favorite chickpea pasta.
In that moment,
I felt very seen
and very loved.
Because it
wasn't just like,
oh, he remembered
I have an allergy.
We hadn't spoken
in a year.
And there were
still these details that
he was like,
those are worth
holding on to.
Those details about
you are worth
something to me.
As I watched this,
I thought, yeah, if
someone I went on
a date with still
remembered a year later
that I preferred
iced over hot coffee,
I would get butterflies.
But on the other hand,
I felt unsure about
how compatible love and
this deep sense of
understanding we want is.
It is a fact that everyone changes,
often in huge and
unpredictable ways.
If we're looking to
be understood in a
deep, almost intuitive way,
how can that be
reconciled with the
dynamic nature of identity?
There are clearly
some types of love
that can and
perhaps should persist
in spite of understanding.
Parental love might require
parents to love their
child even if
they don't understand
their life choices.
Being a good political
subject might require us
to care about our
community members' well-being
even if we
don't understand each other.
True religious love looks
like loving thy neighbor
even when they ascribe
to a different religion.
But why does
understanding feel so crucial
to romantic relationships?
This might have
to do with
the fact that when
we love someone,
we love the
particular individual,
not just the combination
of qualities they have.
Most philosophers of
love reject the
quality view of
love because if
we loved people based
on their qualities,
then we could
just create love machines
that churned out
perfect lovers.
Or when you
lost a loved one,
you could simply replace
them with someone
with the same qualities.
To understand someone
shows that you
get me as a
particular individual.
But this is
where the tension between
understanding and
love becomes evident.
The unique particularity
of each individual is
precisely what gets in
the way of understanding.
The individual is
both a subject
with the ability
to change and
an object constrained
by static facts.
I am 5'3",
living in Toronto
as a student,
born in 2002
to two parents.
I can't change many
facts about myself and
that restrains my freedom.
I'll never play
in the WNBA
no matter how strong
my will is.
But as a subject,
I have the
power to interpret
facts about my life
in different ways.
An event that meant
a lot to me
at 20 years old
may no longer
feel that significant anymore.
An interest I
used to be embarrassed
of may now
be reinterpreted as cool,
giving me confidence
that I never thought
I would have.
By reinterpreting facts
about the self,
we change how we
understand and carry ourselves.
But this process of
reinterpretation doesn't happen alone.
Much of our identity
and self-conception comes
from seeing ourselves through
the eyes of others.
Love's gaze sees
us in a particularly intimate way.
It peeks through the
barriers we usually
put up for others.
"The other's look
fashions my body
in its nakedness,
causes it
to be born,
sculptors it, produces
it as it is,
sees it as I
shall never see it.
The other
holds a secret,
the secret of
what I am."
Thus, love tends to
change us often unexpectedly.
We may find behavior,
habits, interests, and
beliefs altered through
a loving relationship.
Different facts about our
lives become salient to
us depending on
the self-conception
we ascribe to.
And our behavior
will change to reflect
new self-conceptions.
But this entails
that being understood
is never guaranteed.
Someone could
understand you very
well in the first
few years of dating,
but through
loving each other,
each person changes and
actually comes to
understand the other less.
Sometimes lovers
outgrow each other,
but they also couldn't
have done that
growing without each other.
The tension between
our subjectivity and our
objectivity makes it impossible
to reduce people to
some higher coherent
principle that makes sense.
Individuals are full of
contradiction and rich history.
"What if the other
is irreducible,
not only to
my or our thought,
but to thought as such?"
Put another way,
is love reducible
to a feature
of the intellect,
like understanding?
Or does love
necessarily escape intellectual bounds?
Sartre thought love
could never be
confined by understanding,
which made love
a failed project.
Here's the dilemma. We
gain a stable conception
of ourselves through
our lover's perception.
Facing our subjectivity, our
innate potential for change,
that's scary. But in
the eyes of love,
we can escape subjectivity
and feel understood
as a coherent object.
We think of ourselves
as funny or smart
or kind because our
lover's treatment of
us affirms that we
are those things.
Mundane facts like the
veins on my hands,
the way
one's eyelashes curl,
the slight gap
between one's teeth.
The gaze of
our lover gives these
facts value and
thus reasons to exist.
But here's the
other scary part.
Our lover is a
subject who can change.
Who's to say
they will perceive me
the same way
forever or even tomorrow?
But if they change,
then my sense
of self also destabilizes.
Just tell
me the truth!
Chase! You're
scaring me, Pearl.
But I also
can't control them to
stay the same,
otherwise their perception of
me is not genuine.
And again,
I might also
change through their
perception of me.
If to be loved
is to be understood,
then will
love always fail?
Call me a romantic,
but I
hate that conclusion.
I want love to
succeed, goddammit.
There are two
ways we might
move forward then.
One option is
to just accept
that no one
can ever wholly
understand each other,
so we should
accept love without understanding.
But this
doesn't seem right.
This blanket disposal
of understanding ignores
how some people
are prone to
be more misunderstood
than others due
to socio-historical inequalities.
When a woman
is cognizant of
the unequal social
position between her
and her male
partner, for example,
she feels more
vulnerable to domination
instead of partnership.
Too many guys
think they're a concept,
or I complete them,
or
I'm gonna
make them alive.
Being understood might matter
more to the woman,
because women's experiences
are prone to
systemic misunderstanding.
Many women grew
up in patriarchal families
where their needs were
often misunderstood.
There is a
disproportionate number of
cases of women
being dismissed by
doctors for overreacting about
their symptoms or not
understanding their own bodies,
only to later
discover an actual serious
medical issue. Thus,
being understood can help
reassure that these unjust
patterns will not seep
into her personal relationship.
Moreover, we
might also ask,
who has the
privilege of being loved
without being understood?
For some, an
intimate relationship is the
only safe space to
experience their true self.
The second option
for how to
move forward then,
and the option I
tentatively endorse,
is to change what
we expect out
of understanding in love.
Being understood in
love is not purely
an intellectual activity.
It's not enough
to remember facts like
their favorite
restaurant or artist,
or even deeper
information like their trauma.
Because humans are
not stable objects,
and we don't relate
to our own
facts in the same
way at all times.
We are subjects who
can and should
be allowed to change.
That doesn't mean
we should expect nothing
from our lovers.
Of course,
love also requires
responsibility and commitment.
But perhaps the
kind of understanding
required for love includes
being okay with not
understanding sometimes.
Going back to
what I said about
Iris Murdoch earlier,
one of the ways
in which knowing
and understanding might be
different is that understanding
is like a
"just and loving" vision
that makes you feel
seen even if it
clashes with "objective" facts.
Think about that
feeling of reuniting with
someone you loved after
being separated for years,
and still getting
them as if
they'd never left.
These estranged
lovers don't know
many facts about
each other anymore.
Maybe they listen
to different music now.
Maybe they hold different
spiritual beliefs.
But those aren't
necessary for seeing
the other as a
particular subject.
Understanding has to
be flexible so that
when love changes,
you don't feel your
sense of self
being attacked or neglected.
To be loved
is to be understood.
And to be understood
is to SEE me,
even when you
struggle to recognize me.
With a topic like this,
there is always
more that I wish
I could say,
or things I wish
I could clarify better.
But I guess
that's your task
to help me out
in the comments.
What does being
understood or being loved
mean to you?
I also want
to shamelessly plug my
Patreon where I upload
exclusive videos.
I explain cool philosophy
papers and book chapters.
Recently, I did Raymond
Guise's chapter on ideology.
What the
heck is ideology?
In our Brain
Nourishment series episode 6,
we got Raymond
Geuss's book chapter,
Ideology. And also
Susan Sontag's essay,
The Artist as the
Exemplary Sufferer.
There was no
metaphysical or aesthetic inevitability
about his death.
But something spurred
a desperation in the
public to make
David's suffering and
eventual suicide cohere
with his artistry.
If you want
to support my channel,
you can consider subbing
to my Patreon, perhaps.
It's hard work
to make these videos
and I really
want to be
able to be more
active in 2026,
even as I'm
dredging through law school.
Thank you so much
for watching,
let's keep talking, and
I hope to
hear from you soon.
And now, a moment of gratitude for
my current Patreons.